# Seeing Responsabilities and extract them

## Ask to ourself some question:

 - Why is this method here?
 - What is it doing for the class?

## Some heuristics

We are going to discover what is already there. Regardless of what
structure legacy code has, its piece do **identifiable things**

### 1. Group Methods

Look for similar method names. Write down all of the methods on a
class, along with their access types (public, private, and so on), and
try to find ones that seem to go together.

Method grouping is a great team exercise also. Put up poster boards in
your team room with lists of the method names for each of your major
classes. Team members can mark up the posters over time, showing
different groupings of methods. The whole team can hash out which
groupings are better and decide on directions for the code to go in.

### 2. Look at Hidden Methods

Pay attention to private and protected methods. If a class has many of
them, it often indicates that there is another class in the class
dying to get out.

### 3. Look for Decisions That Can Change

Look for decisions—not decisions that you are making in the code, but
decisions that you’ve already made. Is there some way of doing
something (talking to a database, talking to another set of objects,
and so on) that seems hard-coded? Can you imagine it changing?

### 4. Look for Internal Relationships

Look for relationships between instance variables and methods.
Are certain instance variables used by some methods and not others?

Try to draw circles for each variable and method. Draw edge from a
method to a variable if the method uses it. Try to find out clusters
in this graph and extract them.

### 5. Look for the Primary Responsibility

Try to describe the responsibility of the class in a single sentence.

- SRP: Single Responsability Principle
  (look for violation: Interface and Implementation)

- ISP: Interface Segregation Principle
  (what group of functionalities a client must see?)

  When a class is large, rarely do all of its clients use all of its
  methods. Often we can see different groupings of methods that
  particular clients use. If we create an interface for each of these
  groupings and have the large class implement those interfaces, each
  client can see the big class through that particular interface. This
  helps us hide information and also decreases dependency in the
  system. The clients no longer have to recompile whenever the large
  class does.

### 6. When All Else Fails, Do Some Scratch Refactoring

If you are having a lot of trouble seeing responsibilities in a class,
do some scratch refactoring. Scratch refactoring is a powerful tool.
Just remember that it is an artificial exercise. The things you see
when you "scratch" are not necessarily the things you'll end up with
when you refactor.

### 7. Focus on the Current Work

Pay attention to what you have to do right now. If you are providing a
different way of doing anything, you might have identified a
responsibility that you should extract and then allow substitution
for.

Don't be overwhelmed about the number of responsabilites you can
identify in a class, stay focused on what you are changing right now.
Recognize code and extract it.

### Moving Forward

Once you recognize a bunch of responsabilities in a class, you have to
deal with two issues:

  - Strategy
  - Tactics

#### What about the strategy?

The best approach to breaking down big classes is to identify the
responsibilities, make sure that everyone else on the team understands
them, and then break down the class on an as-needed basis. When you do
that, you spread out the risk of the changes and can get other work
done as you go.

#### What about the tactics?

If you are able to get tests in place, you can start to extract a
class in a very straightforward way, using the Extract Class
refactoring. However, if you aren't able to get tests in place, you
can still move forward, albeit in a slightly riskier way. This is a
very conservative approach, and it works regardless of whether you
have a refactoring tool. Some steps:

  1. Identifies variables or methods that should be moved

      - You should extract new methods during this phase,
        proceed by extracting them and add a prefix, example:
        MOVING_[method_name]

  2. Grouping methods and variables
  3. Extract to a new class